Story Recapped here. Today, I'm going to
explain a Sci-fi film called "Altered States."
Spoilers ahead! Watch out and take care.
In the late 1960s, Dr. Eddie Jessup began
conducting sensory deprivation experiments
in an effort to unlock different states of
consciousness. After performing the tests
on 23 students, he decides to volunteer
and enter the sensory deprivation tank.
Eddie spends nearly five hours inside
the tank before asking his colleague,
Arthur, to let him out so he could take a
look at the E.E.G. tracings. He discloses
that he experienced intense hallucinations
during his time inside the tank. Eddie is not
particularly religious, but most of the visions
he experienced came from the book of Revelation.
Arthur notes that Eddie was crying at one point
because he was re-visiting his father's death.
Eddie tells Arthur that he'd like to try the
experiment again soon, even though they still
don't know what to look for. He notes that they
won't be asking for a grant from the university
because they're only going to conduct
the studies to satisfy their curiosity.
During a party at Arthur's home, Eddie
meets Emily, a physical anthropologist,
on her way to acquire her P.H.D. from Columbia.
Eddie immediately warms up to her because she
appears to be as highly motivated and
driven as he is. On the other hand,
Emily finds him fascinating because of his odd
theories about altered states of consciousness.
After leaving the party, Eddie asks Emily
to take him to her home. Emily accedes but
not before warning him that they'll be confined
to the living room because she has a roommate.
After they make love, Eddie tells her that
he had thoughts of God and the crucifixion
of Jesus as they were copulating.
Eddie explains that he regularly had
visions of angels and Christ when he was a
child. The visions only stopped at age 16,
when he stopped believing in God after
witnessing his father die horribly of cancer.
When Eddie gets back in the sensory deprivation
tank, he experiences a vision about his father
at the hospital, along with religious imagery
detailing the crucifixion and the sacrifice of
a seven-eyed goat. A few months pass and Eddie
conducts research on people with schizophrenia.
Emily tells Eddie that she'll be teaching
at Harvard soon and she notes that they
will be spending more time together
since Eddie is also teaching there.
She hints that they should get married since
they've been together for a while. Eddie warns
Emily that he is a bit crazy, but Emily stresses
that she already knows how eccentric he is.
She reiterates her proposal to get married,
saying they'll deal with it if their marriage
turns out to be a disaster. Eddie leaves
the room without giving her an answer.
After interviewing a schizophrenic patient,
Eddie comes out of the room and tells Emily
that he wants to get married. Eddie contends
that he doesn't want to lose Emily, noting that
he's unlikely to find anyone as interesting as
her again if she leaves him. Emily remarks that
Eddie's half-hearted proposal is the closest
declaration of love she'll ever get from him.
Several years later, Eddie invites Arthur and his
other colleague, Mason, to his house for a party.
He notifies Arthur that he'll be going to Mexico
in June to meet with the Hinchi Indians, a tribe
known for performing ancient Toltec rituals
with sacred mushrooms. Eddie discloses that
he saw a sensory deprivation tank at the medical
school in Harvard. He then tells Arthur that he's
interested in resuming their experiments with
the isolation tank when he returns from Mexico.
When Arthur sees the mess in one of
the rooms at Eddie's house, his wife,
Sylvia, divulges that Eddie and Emily
are getting a divorce. Sylvia stresses
that Eddie is the one asking for the divorce,
saying that Emily still loves Eddie very much.
Before they make the divorce official, Emily will
be spending a year in Africa to conduct studies
on apes, and she'll be their children with her.
When Arthur confronts Eddie about the impending
separation, Eddie explains that he's aware of
Emily's feelings for him. But Eddie thinks that
Emily is only hanging on to their marriage because
she is afraid of being alone. He tells Arthur
that he'd soon go out of his mind if he doesn't
withdraw himself from the tedious rituals of life.
While having a drink at a bar, Eddie
starts ranting about finding immortality
and the ultimate truth in the self.
Mason tells him he's going crazy,
but Eddie hints that he's determined to
find the true self through his experiments.
Soon, Eddie goes on his trip to Central
Mexico with his colleague, Eduardo,
to meet with the Hinchi Indians. During the climb
to the mountains, Eduardo reveals that the most
potent ingredients used in the ceremony are
the Amanita muscaria and the shrub Sinichuiche.
The tribe regards the plant as the "first
flower" because it conjures ancient memories.
Eduardo asks the tribe leader, Brujo, what Eddie
should expect when he goes through the ritual.
Brujo tells them that Eddie will return to the
first soul, and he'll enter a void where he'll see
a spot that will turn into a crack, which is the
space between nothingness. Out of the emptiness,
Eddie's unborn soul will emerge.
………………………………..
That night, Brujo takes Eddie to a cave to perform
the ceremony. Brujo cuts Eddie's hand with a knife
and lets the blood drip into a bowl filled with
a mixture. Eddie calls out to Eduardo for help,
but Eduardo just watches as Brujo continues.
Brujo takes a sip of the concoction and passes
it to the other tribe members as they chant.
Finally, the tribe leader nods at Eddie,
signaling that it's his turn to taste the mixture.
After taking a sip, Eddie starts hallucinating.
As the tribe dances around, Eddie sees a vision
of himself with his wife sitting in a garden. A
snake slithers out and wraps itself around Eddie's
neck. A large lizard suddenly appears in front of
him and transforms into Emily. Eddie lies down and
sleeps as the dust start covering their bodies.
When Eddie wakes up, he notices a mutilated
lizard on the ground. Brujo tells him that
he killed a lizard during his hallucinations.
Eddie is furious that he didn't learn much from
the ceremony, saying the Natives had played
a joke on him to make him look like a fool.
Eddie takes home some of the concoction so he
could analyze it. When he tries the mixture at
the university, Eddie experiences visions of hell
and some of the events described in the book of
Revelation. When Eddie passes out from the drug,
Mason advises them to stop the experiment because
he fears that the mixture could cause irreversible
damage to Eddie's body. Arthur, however,
contends that Eddie wouldn't allow anything
to stop him from conducting the experiments.
Mason warns Eddie that the mixture
he's taking is not like L.S.D. or any
psychedelic drugs that have already
been tested by other scientists.
Eddie argues that the Hinchi Indians didn't
suffer any debilitating effects from the mixture
even though they’ve been drinking it regularly
for centuries. Eddie further points out that
he has already tried injecting the mixture into
rats, and there are noticeable effects so far.
Eddie takes them to the basement of the university
to show them the sensory deprivation tank.
Eddie tells Mason that he doesn't get any images
from his hallucinations from the concoction, so
he surmises that the images would show up when he
drinks the mixture in conjunction with the tank.
Mason, worrying that something
wrong could happen to Eddie,
tells them that he no longer wants to take part
in the experiment. However, while Arthur is
preparing Eddie for the experiment, Mason stops
by, saying someone has to keep an eye on them.
After shutting the doors of the tank, Eddie's
hallucinations take him to grasslands where he
comes across vast woodlands and newly born
mountains. After a while, he witnesses the
birth of the first human, not far from chimps
in appearance but capable of walking upright.
Soon, more of them appear, and Eddie
becomes one of them. Eddie relates to
his colleagues that he's killing
a goat and eating its raw flesh.
Mason is worried that Eddie is having a bad trip,
so he opens the tank to check on him. Arthur
asks Eddie if he wants to get out, but Eddie
insists on going through with the experiment.
Mason and Arthur are both startled when they
suddenly hear a loud beastly grunt coming from
the tank. Arthur asks Eddie again if he wants
to stop, but he tells them to leave him alone.
After spending more than four hours inside
the tank, they finally open the hatch to
bring Eddie out. But to their shock, they find
him shivering with blood on his mouth. Arthur
covers him with a blanket while Mason checks
his mouth to see where the blood is coming from.
Eddie is unable to speak, so he
asks Arthur for a pen and a pad.
In the notepad, Eddie asks them to take his
blood and get him to an x-ray so they could
take pictures of his neck before he reconstitutes.
Eddie contends that his hallucination manifested
into his body, but Mason thinks that Eddie is
still out of his mind. Despite his skepticism,
Mason agrees to put him under various tests
to determine the physical effects of the drug.
While Eddie is getting an X-ray, Arthur advises
Mason not to tell Eddie about the blood on his
mouth because he'd claim that it's the blood of
the goat he ate in his vision. Mason surmises
that Eddie must've had a seizure during his
hallucinations and bit his lip while convulsing.
As soon as Eddie gets his voice back, he asks
Mason to keep anyone else from finding out about
his condition, believing that he lost his voice
because he regressed into an ape-like creature.
Mason, however, intends to take the X-ray
films to the radiology department because
he wants someone reliable to assess Eddie's
physical condition. When Mason shows the films
to the radiologist, the doctor tells Mason
that it appears to be an X-ray of a gorilla.
That night, Eddie wakes up next to a female
student and sees his body transforming.
He suppresses his grunts, trying not to wake
up the student, and goes to the bathroom.
The transformation continues while Eddie is
taking a shower, but everything soon returns
to normal when he calms himself down. While
taking notes about the experiment, he smiles,
thinking that he’s close to a breakthrough,
but soon, the transformation starts again.
A few months after the experiment, Eddie
fetches Emily and their daughters from the
airport to drive them to their new home. While
unpacking, Emily discloses that Mason already
told her about the experiments and the genetic
regression he went through several months ago.
She fears that Eddie may have leukemia
or lymphoma, but Eddie points out that
he was already subjected to several tests,
and there has been no evidence of cancer.
Emily notes that the results of Eddie's
blood tests showed some characteristics of
simian blood groups. Eddie becomes increasingly
agitated as he tells Emily about his intention
to return to the isolation tank. He wants to
determine if the regression will happen again,
but he gets furious, remembering that
Mason wouldn't let him back into the lab.
Eddie suspects that he entered another
consciousness during his time at the tank,
and the drug allowed him to externalize the
primitive consciousness he encountered in
the hallucination. He tells Emily that
he will be repeating the experiment,
so he could ask other scientists
to validate the results.
That night, Eddie goes to the lab and enters the
tank without Arthur's supervision. Emily calls
Mason and tells him that Eddie seems like he's
on the verge of a breakdown. She tells Mason that
she's worried about Eddie because he ranted like a
madman all afternoon before he disappeared. After
some time, Eddie emerges from the tank with his
body totally transformed into a primitive human.
Mason wakes up from his lab and hears a
thud, so he goes outside to investigate.
When he opens the door to the isolation tank
room, an ape-like creature emerges and runs away
growling. The hominid chases Mason, so he runs
to the security room and tells the guard that
there's a monkey on the loose in the basement.
When the hominid sees them, the creature runs to
the boiler room and hides in the ceiling pipes.
The guard clangs on the pipes to see if anything
would emerge. Soon, the hominid drops down from
the pipes and attacks the guard with a baton.
After hitting the guard several times in the head,
the creature turns to Mason and chases him. The
hominid soon catches up to Mason and hits him hard
in the head while he was trying to open a door.
The hominid runs out of the building as other
guards chase after him. While running around the
streets, he tries looking for something to eat in
the garbage bins, but a pack of dogs chases him.
He climbs up a building, and the dogs eventually
leave except for one dog that continues chasing
him. Soon, the hominid ends up in a zoo, where
he encounters different animals. He drinks from
a fountain and tries to grab a piece of meat from
a cage, but a tiger emerges and lunges at him.
As he continues wandering around the zoo, he comes
across a herd of sheep. He tries climbing up a
fence to run after them, but he gets electrocuted,
so he climbs up a tree. When he gets to the other
side, he throws a rock and hits a sheep in the
head. While gnawing on the sheep, the ape-like
creature grunts and growls, scaring away any
other animal that might pose a threat to him.
Soon, the zoo's security guard arrives and
sees the dead sheep. Just a few steps away,
Eddie lies face down, completely naked
and unconscious. Eddie is taken to jail,
but he is soon released when Emily posts bail.
He tells Emily that he remembers large fragments
of what happened earlier that night. When they
get home, Eddie narrates that he has entered
a primitive consciousness, and he can only
remember what made sense to him in that state.
He points out that he was totally primal, and his
only focus at the time was surviving and eating.
Despite his primitive state, he feels like
it was the most satisfying time of his life,
though he worries that he might have
killed someone at the university.
Mason arrives and tells Eddie to report to the
security office at the school because the ape
that ran out of the isolation tank room almost
killed a security guard. The following day, Emily
takes a look at Eddie's files while listening
to the tapes of his sessions at the tank.
As she hears Eddie's beastly grunts, Emily starts
to worry that Eddie might really be regressing.
That night, Emily has bad dreams about Eddie, so
she gives him a call and goes to his apartment.
Emily tells Eddie that she thinks that his
experiences at the tank are not limited to
hallucinations. She fears that Eddie is undergoing
genetic transformation, so she asks him not to try
the experiments again. Eddie, however, tells her
that he wants to find out if the transformation
actually happened. Emily warns Eddie that he may
be causing irreversible genetic damage to himself,
but Eddie argues that his experiences
were beyond genetics and matter.
He believes that he may regress back to
the first thought, and he could unlock
secrets that would prompt humanity to
reassess their perception of space-time.
When Emily visits the lab, Mason is already
preparing Eddie to go inside the sensory
deprivation tank. Eddie warns Mason that he
may emerge from the tank in a primitive state,
so he tells Mason to sedate
him while he's still inside.
After observing Eddie for more than two hours,
Emily tells them to bring Eddie out of the tank,
fearing that he might be damaging his genetic
structure. Arthur points out that Eddie will
be vexed if they stop the experiment too
soon. Not long, Eddie starts screaming
inside the tank as his body transforms.
Mason tries to take him out of the tank,
but he's slammed to the wall by a blast of energy.
Emily tries to open the tank, but Mason stops her.
Meanwhile, Arthur falls unconscious while
he's staring at the light from the monitor.
Mason takes Emily outside the lab, but she keeps
struggling, so he knocks her out before going
back inside. When Emily regains consciousness,
he finds Arthur and Mason lying on the floor.
From the observation room, Emily watches the tank
light up as Eddie continues his transformation.
Soon, the tank bursts open, leaving a whirlpool
in its place. With Eddie nowhere to be found,
Emily calls out to him across the vortex. Eddie
rapidly regresses into the primordial cells,
but before he is totally erased out of existence,
Emily reaches into the whirlpool and brings him
back. After getting Eddie back to his apartment,
Mason tells Emily that his vital signs are good,
but he'll probably sleep for a day or two
due to the amount of drugs in his body.
Emily expresses her frustration about falling
desperately in love with Eddie despite his
lack of concern for her. Emily confesses
that he's tried to fall in love with other
men while she was away, but she can't get
Eddie out of her mind. She's dismayed that
Eddie never cared about her because he's
only concerned about finding the truth.
As Arthur and Mason argue about the
terrifying implications of the experiment,
Eddie lies catatonic on the bed. Arthur
points out that they've experienced an
inexplicable physical phenomenon that
night, and he wants to learn more.
He tells Mason that he wants to repeat the
experiment with other subjects, but Mason
argues that they shouldn't administer
the untested drug to innocent people.
After Mason and Arthur leave, Eddie wakes
up and sees Emily lying on the couch.
He covers her with a blanket and lies down on
the floor next to her. The following morning,
Eddie tells Emily that she means so much to
him because she saved him from total oblivion.
He discloses that when he came across the
moment where life began, he was terrified
because he only found total emptiness. Eddie
confesses that the terrifying emptiness inside
him is still trying to devour him, and Emily is
the only one that's keeping him together. Emily
tells him to come back to the real world,
but he thinks it might be too late for him.
When Eddie starts experiencing transformations
again, Emily tells him to fight it.
Emily reaches out and grabs his hand, but Eddie's
primordial energy rapidly devours her. Horrified
by the thought of losing Emily, Eddie fights as
hard as he can to stop the regression. When Eddie
finally returns to his normal form, he embraces
Emily, causing the energy that enveloped her body
to dissipate. Emily smiles in sheer delight and
joy when she finally hears Eddie say he loves her.